<< [corso_ai_2023](corso_ai_2023.md)

# Artificial Intelligence

The course offers an introduction to the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), presenting the key concepts of AI and its impact on society and the world of work, with a specific focus on youth education. It is aimed at teachers and intends to provide the tools and knowledge needed to keep up with technological developments and to evaluate how AI can be integrated into the educational curriculum.

The course will cover the origins of AI and its main achievements so far. Core techniques such as machine learning, artificial neural networks, and genetic algorithms will be discussed.

Whenever possible, theoretical content will be kept to a minimum in favor of hands-on, lab-based activities. Real-world applications will be explored in areas such as medicine, finance, industrial automation, transportation, and security. A selection of online AI tools and platforms will also be examined and tested during the experimental part of the course to assess their potential and limitations.

One of the main goals of the course is to explore the educational implications of AI and how it can be integrated into teaching and learning. Special attention will be given to how AI can support the development of key skills such as critical thinking, problem-solving, creativity, and computational thinking among students. Ethical issues related to the use of AI in schools and in society will also be addressed, along with suggestions and guidelines for a responsible and informed use of these technologies.

Finally, the course will look at future expectations in the field, presenting the views of leading experts and highlighting the wide variety of opinions on the subject.

For each topic covered in the course, references and further readings will be provided to support individual exploration and deeper understanding.



# Intelligenza Artificiale

Il corso introduce al campo dell'intelligenza artificiale (IA), illustrando 
i concetti chiave dell’IA e il suo impatto sulla società e sul mondo del 
lavoro con un focus specifico sulla formazione dei giovani. Il corso è 
rivolto ai docenti, e mira a illustrare gli strumenti e le conoscenze 
necessarie per tenersi al passo con gli sviluppi tecnologici e a valutare 
l’integrazione dell’IA nel curriculum educativo.

Saranno illustrate le origini dell’IA e i principali risultati finora 
raggiunti, saranno trattate le principali tecniche impiegate, come il *Machine 
Learning*, le reti neurali artificiali e gli algoritmi genetici. 

Quando possibile, la trattazione teorica sarà ridotta all’essenziale 
privilegiando la sperimentazione laboratoriale. Saranno descritte le 
principali applicazioni nella medicina, la finanza, l'automazione 
industriale, i trasporti e la sicurezza. Saranno analizzate le applicazioni 
disponibili sulla Rete e saranno valutate le loro potenzialità e i loro 
limiti utilizzandole durante la sezione sperimentale del corso. 

Uno degli obiettivi principali del corso è quello di discutere sulle 
implicazioni didattiche dell'IA e di come essa possa essere integrata 
nell'insegnamento e nell'apprendimento. Saranno valutate le opportunità 
dell’IA per sviluppare competenze specifiche quali il pensiero critico, 
la risoluzione di problemi, la creatività e lo sviluppo del pensiero 
computazionale tra gli studenti. Saranno esplorati inoltre gli aspetti 
etici associati all'utilizzo dell'IA a scuola e nella società indicando 
suggerimenti e linee guida per un utilizzo consapevole e responsabile 
dell’IA.

Infine, saranno illustrate le aspettative per lo sviluppo futuro riportando 
le opinioni dei maggiori esperti del settore, evidenziando la notevole 
eterogeneità sulle diverse opinioni. 

Per tutti i temi affrontati durante il corso saranno forniti i riferimenti 
bibliografici per favorire l’approfondimento sulle tematiche di maggior 
interesse.
